url:https://patient.info/cancer/gynaecological-cancer

Health Info Cancer   Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback A number of cancers can arise in the female reproductive organs. This leaflet explains where these organs are and links to information about the individual cancers. The female anatomy What is cancer? What types of gynaecological cancers are there? Is there screening for gynaecological cancers? The female anatomy What is cancer? What types of gynaecological cancers are there? Is there screening for gynaecological cancers? Gynaecological cancers are those which arise in the female reproductive organs. So it helps to be able to picture what and where these are. The womb (uterus) is a pouch with walls made of muscle. It is where babies grow when you are pregnant. The inside lining of the womb is called the endometrium . This lining is shed every month causing the bleeding you experience as a period when you are not pregnant. Just one in five women realise bloating is a symptom of ovarian cancer. Early diagnosis makes th... Do you know the early signs of ovarian cancer? 4min Why you shouldn't skip your smear test 5min The female reproductive system (anatomy, the menstrual cycle, and ovulation) How to get over smear test fear 6min The lower opening, or neck of the womb, is called the cervix . This is the opening through which the blood travels from the womb to the outside during a period. It stretches wide open during childbirth. The cervix sits at the top of a muscular tube called the vagina . This is a passage through which the blood passes during a period, and this also stretches during childbirth. During sexual intercourse when a penis is in the vagina, sperm is released from the penis and can enter the cervix into the womb. If there is an egg there, it can lead to a pregnancy. The ovaries are two oval-shaped organs connected to the upper part of the womb on either side by the Fallopian tubes . Ovaries produce eggs and release them (where they are passed through the Fallopian tubes to the womb) in a monthly process called ovulation. The ovaries also produce the female hormones, oestrogen and progesterone. The vulva is the part of the female reproductive system which is on the outside. It is the part of the genital area which surrounds the opening of the vagina. The vulva includes: The labia majora. These are, in effect, large folds of skin. The labia minora. These are more delicate folds of skin just inside the labia majora. The clitoris - a small organ involved with sexual arousal. Tiny glands, the most prominent being the Bartholin's glands. The entrance to the urethra - the tube through which urine is passed from the bladder. The entrance to the vagina. Cancer is a condition where cells of a particular body organ multiply out of control. These abnormal cells can then spread around the body, causing damage and harm. Cancers in different organs are different illnesses, with different symptoms and different treatments. See the separate leaflet called Cancer .   What is vaginal cancer? 00:58 Do gynae cancers cause bleeding? 00:51 What are the symptoms of gynae cancer? 00:50 Are gynae cancers painful? 00:55 Can gynae cancers cause infertility? 00:52 Cancer can arise in any of the female reproductive organs. Click on the links below to read about each individual type of cancer. Cancer of the uterus (endometrial cancer) . Cancer of the ovary . Cancer of the cervix . Cancer of the vulva. A pre-cancerous skin condition called vulval intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN) can, in some cases, turn into cancer of the vulva if not treated. Cancer of the vagina. This is very rare. It tends to occur in older women. Cancer of the Fallopian tubes. This is rare. It tends to have similar symptoms to ovarian cancer and is diagnosed and treated in much the same way. Currently in the UK there is a national screening programme for cervical cancer, but none of the other gynaecological cancers. This is because cervical cancer, in many cases, can be picked up in the very early stages, before it is even cancer. Typical cell changes are picked up in a smear test. Read about cervical screening (the cervical smear test) for more information. This pre-cancer stage can be treated so that cancer doesn't develop. This is done during a process called colposcopy. Read about colposcopy and cervical treatments . Cancer of the Uterus (Endometrial Cancer) Are you protected against flu? See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today. from the best health experts in the business Ovarian cancer - the recognition and initial management of ovarian cancer ; NICE Clinical Guideline (April 2011 - last updated October 2023) Newly diagnosed and relapsed epithelial ovarian carcinoma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up ; European Society for Medical Oncology (2013 - last updated 2020) Endometrial cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up ; European Society for Medical Oncology (2016) Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Vulval Carcinoma ; Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (updated May 2022) Ovarian cancer statistics ; Cancer Research UK Lai J, Elleray R, Nordin A, et al ; Vulval cancer incidence, mortality and survival in England: age-related trends. BJOG. 2014 May121(6):728-38 Ovarian cancer - the recognition and initial management of ovarian cancer ; NICE Clinical Guideline (April 2011 - last updated October 2023) Newly diagnosed and relapsed epithelial ovarian carcinoma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up ; European Society for Medical Oncology (2013 - last updated 2020) Endometrial cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up ; European Society for Medical Oncology (2016) Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Vulval Carcinoma ; Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (updated May 2022) Ovarian cancer statistics ; Cancer Research UK Lai J, Elleray R, Nordin A, et al ; Vulval cancer incidence, mortality and survival in England: age-related trends. BJOG. 2014 May121(6):728-38 Why you shouldn't skip your smear test Ovarian Cancer Vulval Cancer Cervical Cancer The female reproductive system (anatomy, the menstrual cycle, and ovulation) i fould out i have Complex Hyperplasia atypia. Have tp see a cancer dr.Then get Hysterotomy My question is,Why Cancer Dr.This is Pre cancer? Authored by Dr Mary Harding, MRCGP Last updated by Dr Krishna Vakharia, MRCGP Peer reviewed by Dr Colin Tidy, MRCGP Document ID 29665 (v2) Originally published on 28 November 2017 Last updated on 07 September 2022 Next review date 06 September 2027 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians. Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions . Cancer of the Uterus (Endometrial Cancer) Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email