url:https://patient.info/cancer/cancer/types-of-cancer

Health Info Cancer Cancer   Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback There are more than 100 different types of cancer. Each type is classified by the type of cell the cancer originates from. What are the different types of cancer? What are tumours? What is carcinoma in situ? What are the different types of cancer? What are tumours? What is carcinoma in situ? There are more than 100 different types of cancer. Each type is classified by the type of cell the cancer originates from. For example, a breast cell, a lung cell, etc. Each type of cancer generally falls into one of three categories: Carcinomas are cancers that arise from cells which line a body surface, or the lining of a gland - for example, the skin, or the lining of the gut, mouth, neck of the womb (cervix), airways, etc. Sarcomas are cancers that arise from cells which make up the connective tissues such as bones or muscles. For example, an osteosarcoma is a cancer of bone tissue. Leukaemias and lymphomas are cancers of cells in bone marrow and lymph glands. For example, leukaemia is a cancer of cells that make white blood cells. The five most common cancers in the UK are Breast Cancer , Lung Cancer , Prostate Cancer , Bowel Cancer and Skin Cancer - but there are many more types. Links to detailed leaflets on each are provided below: Bladder Cancer Brain Cancer and Brain Tumours Breast Cancer Cancer of the Uterus (Endometrial Cancer) Cervical Cancer Childhood Leukaemias Colon, Rectal and Bowel Cancer (Colorectal Cancer) Gynaecological Cancer Hodgkin's Lymphoma Kidney Cancer Leukaemia Lung Cancer Mouth Cancer (Oral Cancer) Neck Lumps and Bumps Neuroblastoma Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Oesophageal Cancer Ovarian Cancer Pancreatic Cancer Penile Cancer Primary Bone Cancer Primary Liver Cancer Prostate Cancer Retinoblastoma Rhabdomyosarcoma Scrotal Lumps, Pain and Swelling Melanoma Skin Cancer Non-melanoma Skin Cancer Stomach Cancer (Gastric Cancer) Testicular Cancer Throat Cancer (Laryngeal Cancer) Thyroid Cancer Vulval Cancer Wilms' Tumour Bladder Cancer Brain Cancer and Brain Tumours Breast Cancer Cancer of the Uterus (Endometrial Cancer) Cervical Cancer Childhood Leukaemias Colon, Rectal and Bowel Cancer (Colorectal Cancer) Gynaecological Cancer Hodgkin's Lymphoma Kidney Cancer Leukaemia Lung Cancer Mouth Cancer (Oral Cancer) Neck Lumps and Bumps Neuroblastoma Non-Hodgkin's Lymphoma Oesophageal Cancer Ovarian Cancer Pancreatic Cancer Penile Cancer Primary Bone Cancer Primary Liver Cancer Prostate Cancer Retinoblastoma Rhabdomyosarcoma Scrotal Lumps, Pain and Swelling Melanoma Skin Cancer Non-melanoma Skin Cancer Stomach Cancer (Gastric Cancer) Testicular Cancer Throat Cancer (Laryngeal Cancer) Thyroid Cancer Vulval Cancer Wilms' Tumour A tumour is a lump or growth of tissue made up from abnormal cells. Tumours are divided into two types: benign and malignant. These may form in various parts of the body. Benign tumours grow slowly and do not spread or invade other tissues. They are not cancerous and are not usually life-threatening. They often do no harm if they are left alone. However, some benign tumours can cause problems. For example, some grow quite large and may cause local pressure symptoms, or look unsightly. Also, some benign tumours that arise from cells in hormone glands can make too much hormone, which can cause unwanted effects. Malignant tumours tend to grow quite quickly, and invade into nearby tissues and organs, which can cause damage. Tumours normally develop in one original site - the primary tumour. Malignant tumours may also spread to other parts of the body to form secondary tumours (metastases). This happens if some cells break off from the primary tumour and are carried in the bloodstream or lymph channels to other parts of the body. These secondary tumours may then grow, invade and damage nearby tissues, and spread again. Note : not all cancers form solid tumours. For example, in cancer of the blood cells (leukaemia) many abnormal blood cells are made in the bone marrow and circulate in the bloodstream. A carcinoma in situ is the very early stage of a cancer when the abnormal cancer cells are confined to their original site. At this stage no tumour has grown and no cancer cells have spread. It may be that many cancers remain at this dormant stage for months, or even years, before they start to grow and spread into a proper cancer. This may be because the cells of the carcinoma in situ do not have the ability to stimulate new blood vessels. If they cannot stimulate new blood vessels to grow then the cancer itself cannot grow or spread. It is thought that one or more of the cells in a carcinoma in situ may then mutate after some time (some genes may be altered). This then gives them the ability to make chemicals to stimulate new blood vessels. The cancer then grows and spreads as described above. A carcinoma in situ contains only a small number of cells and is usually too small to be detected by scans or X-rays. However, some screening tests may detect a carcinoma in situ. For example, some cells from an abnormal cervical screening test , looked at under the microscope, may show carcinoma in situ. These cells can then be destroyed by treatment which prevents cancer from developing. Sometimes a small sample (a biopsy) taken from a part of the body may show a carcinoma in situ. Cancer Bone Scan Are you protected against flu? See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today. from the best health experts in the business What is Cancer? ; National Cancer Institute What is Cancer? ; National Cancer Institute Cancer Stages of Cancer Cancer Symptoms Diagnosing Cancer Cancer Treatment i fould out i have Complex Hyperplasia atypia. Have tp see a cancer dr.Then get Hysterotomy My question is,Why Cancer Dr.This is Pre cancer? Authored by Dr Gurvinder Rull Last updated by Dr Hayley Willacy Peer reviewed by Dr Doug McKechnie Document ID 30040 (v2) Originally published on 14 November 2017 Last updated on 13 February 2023 Next review date 06 January 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians. Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions . Cancer Bone Scan Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email