url:https://patient.info/cancer/cancer

Cancer is a disease of the cells in the body. There are many different types of cells in the body, and many different types of cancer which arise from different types of cells.   Cancer occurs when cells become abnormal and multiply out of control. Different cells in the different parts of the body when multiplied cause different cancers. Some grow and spread more quickly than others and some are easier to treat than others, particularly if diagnosed at an early stage. Treatments can vary - some respond to chemotherapy, radiotherapy , or other treatments, while some may need surgery. Some cancers have a better outlook (prognosis) than others - having a very good chance of being cured. For some types of cancer, the outlook is much poorer and therefore these have to be managed in a different way. So, each cancer is different and behaves differently. We cannot put 'cancer' into one box. In each case it is important to know exactly what type of cancer has developed, how large it has become, whether it has spread and how well the particular type of cancer responds to various treatments. This will enable you to get reliable information on treatment options and outlook. Living with cancer can be very difficult. Not only can treatments take their toll physically, a ... Why do young LGBTQ+ people have a poorer experience of cancer care? 4min How to look after your hair during chemotherapy 5min What it's like to live with cancer fatigue 4min Cancer myths you need to stop believing 4min Types of Cancer Are you protected against flu? See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today. from the best health experts in the business Kirkegaard H, Johnsen NF, Christensen J, et al ; Association of adherence to lifestyle recommendations and risk of colorectal cancer: a prospective Danish cohort study. BMJ. 2010 Oct 26341:c5504. doi: 10.1136/bmj.c5504. What is Cancer? ; National Cancer Institute Kirkegaard H, Johnsen NF, Christensen J, et al ; Association of adherence to lifestyle recommendations and risk of colorectal cancer: a prospective Danish cohort study. BMJ. 2010 Oct 26341:c5504. doi: 10.1136/bmj.c5504. What is Cancer? ; National Cancer Institute Last updated by Dr Krishna Vakharia Peer reviewed by Dr Hayley Willacy Document ID 4804 (v44) Last updated on 11 February 2023 Next review date 09 January 2028 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians. Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Cancer myths you need to stop believing Cancer Symptoms Radiotherapy Types of Cancer Biopsy More Cancer articles Share your experience with 1657 members from our Cancer community. i fould out i have Complex Hyperplasia atypia. Have tp see a cancer dr.Then get Hysterotomy My question is,Why Cancer Dr.This is Pre cancer? Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions . Types of Cancer Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email