url:https://patient.info/cancer/blood-cancers

Health Info Cancer   Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback Blood cancers affect how your blood cells are made and function. Most of these cancers start in your bone marrow where blood is produced. The effects of the blood cancer will depend on the exact type of cancer and which blood cells are affected. What is blood cancer? Blood cancer symptoms Blood cancer treatment Types of blood cancer What is leukaemia? What is a lymphoma? What is myeloma? What is blood cancer? Blood cancer symptoms Blood cancer treatment Types of blood cancer What is leukaemia? What is a lymphoma? What is myeloma? Blood cancers may affect the blood, bone marrow and lymphatic system. The tests for blood cancers include blood tests , scans (including CT scan or MRI scan ) and a bone marrow biopsy and aspiration . Blood cancers account for about 10% of all cancer cases in the UK. But although a large number o... What are the early warning signs of blood cancer? 4min What is blood? What is blood? The symptoms caused by blood cancers will vary but may include the effects of: Accumulation of abnormal cells in different parts of the body - for example, lymph glands, liver, spleen or brain. This may cause swelling, pain and also loss of function of any affected organ. Abnormal production and function of blood cells : Red blood cells : this will cause anaemia, which may lead to severe tiredness, exhaustion and collapse. White blood cells : this will reduce your ability to fight against infections so that even minor infections may cause severe problems. Platelets : this will cause abnormal bleeding, including extensive bruising (often without any injury) or serious internal bleeding. Red blood cells : this will cause anaemia, which may lead to severe tiredness, exhaustion and collapse. White blood cells : this will reduce your ability to fight against infections so that even minor infections may cause severe problems. Platelets : this will cause abnormal bleeding, including extensive bruising (often without any injury) or serious internal bleeding. The treatments for blood cancers include surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and stem cell transplants. The combination of treatment used will depend on many factors, particularly the type of blood cancer and how far advanced it has become. There are three main types of blood cancers: Leukaemia Lymphoma Myeloma Leukaemia is a cancer of cells in the bone marrow (the cells which develop into blood cells). See the separate leaflet called Cancer for more general information about cancer . With leukaemia, the cancerous cells in the bone marrow spill out into the bloodstream. There are several types of leukaemia. Most types arise from cells which normally develop into white blood cells. If you develop leukaemia it is important to know exactly what type it is. This is because the outlook (prognosis) and treatments vary for the different types. Before discussing the different types of leukaemia it may help to know some basics about normal blood cells and how they are made. See the separate leaflet called Leukaemia . A lymphoma is a cancer of cells in the lymphatic system. Lymphomas are divided into two types: Hodgkin's lymphoma - read more about Hodgkin's lymphoma . Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma - read more about non-Hodgkin's lymphoma . There are different types of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. It is important to know exactly what type you have. This is because the treatments and outlook (prognosis) can vary for different types of lymphoma. See the separate leaflet called The Immune System for more information about the lymphatic system . Myeloma is a cancer that affects cells in the bone marrow, called plasma cells. As the cancerous plasma cells fill the bone marrow, you are not able to make enough normal blood cells. This can lead to anaemia, bleeding problems and infections. Other symptoms include bone pain, breaks (fractures) due to bone damage, and kidney damage. In many cases, treatment with chemotherapy and other treatments can control the disease, ease symptoms and prolong survival for a number of years. See the separate leaflet called Myeloma (Myelomatosis) . Hodgkin's Lymphoma Are you protected against flu? See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today. from the best health experts in the business Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: diagnosis and management ; NICE Guideline (July 2016) Myeloma: diagnosis and management ; NICE Guidance, (February 2016 - last updated October 2018) Hodgkin's lymphoma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis treatment and follow-up ; European Society for Medical Oncology (2014) Ansell SM ; Hodgkin lymphoma: 2016 update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management. Am J Hematol. 2016 Jun91(4):434-42. doi: 10.1002/ajh.24272. Guideline on the Management of Primary Resistant and Relapsed Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma ; British Committee for Standards in Haematology and the British Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation (2013) Multiple myeloma: diagnosis, treatment and follow-up ; ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline (2017) Bone Marrow Transplantation and Peripheral Blood Stem Cell Transplantation ; National Cancer Institute (US) Inamoto Y, Lee SJ ; Late effects of blood and marrow transplantation. Haematologica. 2017 Apr102(4):614-625. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2016.150250. Epub 2017 Feb 23. Haematological cancers: improving outcomes ; NICE Guidance (May 2016) Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: diagnosis and management ; NICE Guideline (July 2016) Myeloma: diagnosis and management ; NICE Guidance, (February 2016 - last updated October 2018) Hodgkin's lymphoma: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis treatment and follow-up ; European Society for Medical Oncology (2014) Ansell SM ; Hodgkin lymphoma: 2016 update on diagnosis, risk-stratification, and management. Am J Hematol. 2016 Jun91(4):434-42. doi: 10.1002/ajh.24272. Guideline on the Management of Primary Resistant and Relapsed Classical Hodgkin Lymphoma ; British Committee for Standards in Haematology and the British Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation (2013) Multiple myeloma: diagnosis, treatment and follow-up ; ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline (2017) Bone Marrow Transplantation and Peripheral Blood Stem Cell Transplantation ; National Cancer Institute (US) Inamoto Y, Lee SJ ; Late effects of blood and marrow transplantation. Haematologica. 2017 Apr102(4):614-625. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2016.150250. Epub 2017 Feb 23. Haematological cancers: improving outcomes ; NICE Guidance (May 2016) What is blood? Hodgkin's Lymphoma Myeloma (Myelomatosis) Bone Marrow Biopsy and Aspiration Stem Cell Transplant 6 months ago i saw a Rheumatologist who diagnosed me with Polymyalgia Rheumatica, whilst doing the blood test he came across a paroprotein in my blood which the lab had said was too small to... Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Last updated by Dr Colin Tidy Peer reviewed by Dr John Cox Document ID 29666 (v1) Last updated on 23 November 2017 Status Archived The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians. Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions . Hodgkin's Lymphoma Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email