url:https://patient.info/medicine/lapatinib-tablets-tyverb

Medicines Cancer Treatment and Drugs   Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback Lapatinib is given for the treatment of breast cancer. It is taken once a day, either one hour before a meal or one hour afterwards. You will need to have regular check-ups so it is important that you keep your appointments with your doctor and/or hospital. Contact your doctor straightaway if you feel short of breath or develop severe diarrhoea. About lapatinib Before taking lapatinib How to take lapatinib tablets Getting the most from your treatment Can lapatinib tablets cause problems? How to store lapatinib Important information about all medicines About lapatinib Before taking lapatinib How to take lapatinib tablets Getting the most from your treatment Can lapatinib tablets cause problems? How to store lapatinib Important information about all medicines Lapatinib is a medicine which is given for the treatment of breast cancer which has progressed despite other treatment, or which has spread into other areas of your body. It is taken alongside other anti-cancer medicines. In cancer, certain cells in the body grow and multiply in a way that is 'out of control'. Chemotherapy (anti-cancer) medicines work by inhibiting the way cells grow and increase in number. Lapatinib belongs to a group of anti-cancer medicines known as tyrosine kinase inhibitors. These medicines work by blocking the chemical messengers (called tyrosine kinases) which send signals to cells to grow. This in turn stops cancer cells from growing and spreading. Some medicines are not suitable for people with certain conditions, and sometimes a medicine may only be used if extra care is taken. For these reasons, before you start taking lapatinib it is important that your doctor knows: If you have an infection or feel particularly unwell. If you have any problems with the way your liver works, or any problems with the way your kidneys work. If you have a heart condition or if you have been told you have an unusual heart rhythm. If you are pregnant or breastfeeding. If you are taking or using any other medicines. This includes any medicines you are taking which are available to buy without a prescription, as well as herbal and complementary medicines. If you have ever had an allergic reaction to a medicine. Before you start the treatment, read any printed information you have been given by your doctor and the printed manufacturer's leaflet from inside the pack of tablets. These will give you more information about lapatinib and will provide a full list of the side-effects which you may experience from taking it. Lapatinib will be prescribed for you by a specialist doctor who is experienced in treating your condition. It is important that you take the tablets exactly as you are told to. You will be asked to take one dose of lapatinib each day. The number of tablets that you will be asked to take for each dose will depend upon what other treatment you are having - it will be in the range of 4-6 tablets per dose. The directions for taking the tablets will be printed on the label of the pack to remind you, but should you have any concerns, contact your doctor or hospital clinic for further advice. Swallow the tablets with a drink of water. Take lapatinib at the same time of day each day, as this will help you to remember to take your doses regularly. You can choose whether to take the tablets before or after meals, but you should continue to take all of your doses in the same way. So, either always take your doses one hour before meals, or always one hour afterwards. If you forget to take a dose, make sure you remember to take your next dose when it is due. Do not take two doses on the same day to make up for a forgotten dose. Do not drink grapefruit juice while you are on lapatinib. This is because a chemical in grapefruit juice can interfere with the amount of lapatinib in your bloodstream. You must try to keep your regular appointments with your doctor or hospital. This is so your doctor can check on your progress. You will need to have regular check-ups during treatment. If at any time you feel short of breath or if you develop a high temperature (fever) or a dry cough, you must let your doctor know about it straightaway so that it can be investigated. If you buy or take any other medicines, check with a pharmacist that they are suitable to take alongside lapatinib. You should not take any preparations which contain St John's wort (a herbal remedy used for low moods), as these can reduce the effectiveness of lapatinib. If you are having an operation or dental treatment, always tell the person carrying out the treatment which medicines you are taking. It is important that you do not get pregnant while you are taking lapatinib. If relevant, make sure you discuss with your doctor which types of contraception are suitable for you and your partner. Along with their useful effects, most medicines can cause unwanted side-effects although not everyone experiences them. The table below contains some of the most common ones associated with lapatinib. You will find a full list in the manufacturer's information leaflet supplied with your medicine. The unwanted effects often improve as your body adjusts to the new medicine, but speak with your doctor or pharmacist if any of the following continue or become troublesome. If you experience any other symptoms which you think may be due to the tablets, ask your doctor or pharmacist for advice. Keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children. Store in a cool, dry place, away from direct heat and light. Please return any unused or unwanted tablets to your clinic or pharmacy to destroy. Never take more than the prescribed dose. If you suspect that you or someone else might have taken an overdose of this medicine, go to the accident and emergency department of your local hospital. Take the container with you, even if it is empty. This medicine is for you. Never give it to other people even if their condition appears to be the same as yours. Do not keep out-of-date or unwanted medicines. Take them to your local pharmacy which will dispose of them for you. If you have any questions about this medicine ask your pharmacist. Are you protected against flu? See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today. from the best health experts in the business Manufacturer's PIL, Tyverb® 250 mg Tablets ; Novartis Pharmaceuticals UK Ltd, The electronic Medicines Compendium. Dated October 2022. Medicines Complete BNF 86th Edition ; British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London. Manufacturer's PIL, Tyverb® 250 mg Tablets ; Novartis Pharmaceuticals UK Ltd, The electronic Medicines Compendium. Dated October 2022. Medicines Complete BNF 86th Edition ; British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London. Breast Cancer Familial Breast Cancer Fulvestrant for breast cancer (Faslodex) Exemestane for breast cancer (Aromasin) Anastrozole for breast cancer (Arimidex) I am so scared I have breast cancer other then the reddness i dont have any lumps i can feel or any other symptoms, I cant get a doctors appointment for a month. has anyone else had anything similar... Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Last updated by Michael Stewart Peer reviewed by Sid Dajani Document ID 28857 (v4) Last updated on 04 July 2023 Next review date 03 July 2026 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians. Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions . Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email