url:https://patient.info/news-and-features/do-you-know-the-signs-of-ovarian-cancer

Health Info Gynaecological Cancer Features Save Remove from Saved Print Share Feedback Save Remove from Saved Print Share Feedback Just one in five women realise bloating is a symptom of ovarian cancer. Early diagnosis makes the disease easier to treat, so it's important to be aware of the signs. Persistent and constant bloating could be a symptom of ovarian cancer - the sixth most common cancer among UK women. Laura Everley, from West Sussex, was diagnosed with ovarian cancer in 2014, in her 30s. She says: "Before I was diagnosed I was experiencing all of the symptoms of ovarian cancer, including bloating . I thought that I might have irritable bowel syndrome . I'd even tried going gluten-free, but it made no difference. The idea of cancer hadn't even entered my head. You just never dream this is going to happen to you." Research produced in 2023 by Target Ovarian Cancer shows that, like Laura, more than 5 in 10 women would change their diet if they were concerned about bloating, but only around 3 in 10 would see a doctor about it 1 . Luckily, a social media post may have saved Laura's life. "I first realised I could have cancer when I saw a post on Facebook listing all the symptoms of the disease. A friend had shared a post from a friend of theirs about her experiences of cancer and what she'd been through. There was a list of symptoms and I was shocked to realise that I had them all," she reveals. Currently two thirds of women are diagnosed with ovarian cancer once the cancer has spread , making it more difficult to treat. But caught at an early stage, before it has spread from the ovaries, long-term survival rates are more than 90% 2 . This is why it's so important to be aware of the symptoms. Target Ovarian Cancer's research shows that just 1 in 5 women in the UK can name bloating as a major symptom of ovarian cancer 2 . And it's not the only sign of the disease women need to know about. Persistent bloating - not the kind that comes and goes over the day. Feeling full quickly and/or loss of appetite. Lower stomach pain . Urinary symptoms - needing to wee more urgently or more often than usual. Annwen Jones, chief executive of the charity says: "If you’re experiencing any of the symptoms regularly, and they are not normal for you, it is important that you see your GP. Early diagnosis of ovarian cancer makes the disease easier to treat." Gynaecological cancer charity The Eve Appeal is keen to champion this message too. Ovarian and other gynaecological cancers - that's cervical, vulval, vaginal and womb- are not talked about enough, leaving women confused about the signs and symptoms of each illness. Athena Lamnisos, chief executive of the organisation, says: "Early detection is key, and with so few women in the UK confident of spotting a symptom of ovarian cancer, we've clearly got some work to do here. That's one of the big jobs that we share with all the ovarian charities and support groups." Despite the strong preventative measures in place, 3,200 cases of cervical cancer are diagnosed ... What affects your chances of surviving cervical cancer? 4min Cervical cancer signs and what to look for 5min What to expect when you have a colposcopy 5min It is unlikely that your symptoms are caused by a serious problem, but it's still important to get checked out. GP Dr Sarah Jarvis says: "Every woman needs to be aware of these symptoms and they need to be prepared to speak to their GP about them. But don't panic - in the vast majority of cases, the cause is much less worrying. It's important to realise that your GP may have good reason for reassuring you." At the moment, there isn't a national screening programme for ovarian cancer - like there is for cervical cancer or breast cancer . That means it's vitally important women be aware of the early signs of ovarian cancer Laura was able to get a hysterectomy to treat the cancer: "I look back now and think, 'thank goodness for that Facebook post. Without that it could have been another two or three months before I got diagnosed. It might have been too late then. It can be so aggressive and it can spread so quickly that I think I was so lucky to catch it when I did." Target Ovarian Cancer: Targeting awareness as a new survey reveals women more likely to change eating habits than get checked . Target Ovarian Cancer: Key facts and figures . What affects your chances of surviving cervical cancer? Cervical cancer signs and what to look for Are you protected against flu? See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today. from the best health experts in the business Why you shouldn't skip your smear test Ovarian Cancer Vulval Cancer Cervical Cancer The female reproductive system (anatomy, the menstrual cycle, and ovulation) i fould out i have Complex Hyperplasia atypia. Have tp see a cancer dr.Then get Hysterotomy My question is,Why Cancer Dr.This is Pre cancer? Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions . Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email