url:https://patient.info/cancer/diagnosing-cancer

Health Info Cancer   Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback Your doctor will examine you to look for abnormalities such as a lump under the skin, or an enlarged liver. You may be referred for tests. How is cancer diagnosed? Some questions you may want to go through with your doctor How is cancer diagnosed? Some questions you may want to go through with your doctor Your doctor will examine you to look for abnormalities such as a lump under the skin, or an enlarged liver. You may be referred for tests such as X-rays , scans, blood tests , endoscopy , bronchoscopy , etc, depending on where the suspected cancer is situated. These tests can often find the site of a suspected cancer. However, a sample (biopsy) is often needed to be certain that the abnormality is a cancer and not something else - such as a non-cancerous (benign) tumour. A biopsy is a procedure where a small sample of tissue is removed from a part of the body. The sample is then examined under the microscope or tested in other ways to detect abnormal cells. Sometimes it is easy to obtain a biopsy. For example, from a lump on the skin which may be a skin cancer. However, it can be difficult to obtain a biopsy from deeper tissues and it may require specialised procedures. If you have been diagnosed with cancer you will have many questions. The following are some suggested questions that you may wish to go over with your doctor: What type of cancer do I have? How large is it and has it spread to other parts of my body? What are the treatment options for this type of cancer? What are the risks and possible side-effects of the treatment options? How successful is the treatment for my type and stage of cancer? Is the aim of treatment to cure or to control the cancer? Are you protected against flu? See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today. from the best health experts in the business Kirkegaard H, Johnsen NF, Christensen J, et al ; Association of adherence to lifestyle recommendations and risk of colorectal cancer: a prospective Danish cohort study. BMJ. 2010 Oct 26341:c5504. doi: 10.1136/bmj.c5504. What is Cancer? ; National Cancer Institute Kirkegaard H, Johnsen NF, Christensen J, et al ; Association of adherence to lifestyle recommendations and risk of colorectal cancer: a prospective Danish cohort study. BMJ. 2010 Oct 26341:c5504. doi: 10.1136/bmj.c5504. What is Cancer? ; National Cancer Institute Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Last updated by Dr Gurvinder Rull Peer reviewed by Dr Hannah Gronow Document ID 30042 (v1) Last updated on 14 November 2017 Status Archived The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians. Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions . Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email