url:https://patient.info/medicine/diethylstilbestrol-tablets

Medicines Cancer Treatment and Drugs   Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback Save Remove from Saved Download Share Feedback Diethylstilbestrol can be taken by both men and women. As a guide the usual dose for men is 1-3 mg daily, and for women it is 10-20 mg daily. Follow your doctor's instructions carefully. About diethylstilbestrol Before taking diethylstilbestrol How to take diethylstilbestrol Getting the most from your treatment Can diethylstilbestrol cause problems? How to store diethylstilbestrol Important information about all medicines About diethylstilbestrol Before taking diethylstilbestrol How to take diethylstilbestrol Getting the most from your treatment Can diethylstilbestrol cause problems? How to store diethylstilbestrol Important information about all medicines Diethylstilbestrol is an oestrogen hormone treatment which helps to control the symptoms of some cancers. It is sometimes used to treat prostate cancer , particularly if other therapies are not suitable. It is also occasionally used in women to treat breast cancer (providing you have been through the menopause). Some medicines are not suitable for people with certain conditions, and sometimes a medicine can only be used if extra care is taken. For these reasons, before you start taking diethylstilbestrol it is important that your doctor knows: If you have a heart condition or any problems with your blood vessels. If you have any problems with the way your liver works. If it is for breast cancer and you have not been through the menopause. This is because diethylstilbestrol must not be taken by a woman who could become pregnant. If you are taking any other medicines. This includes any medicines you are taking which are available to buy without a prescription, as well as herbal and complementary medicines. If you have ever had an allergic reaction to a medicine. Before you start the treatment, read the manufacturer's printed information leaflet from inside the pack. It will give you more information about diethylstilbestrol, and will also provide you with a full list of the side-effects which you could experience from taking it. Take diethylstilbestrol exactly as your doctor tells you to. Your doctor or pharmacist will tell you how many tablets to take a day, and these directions will also be printed on the label of the pack of tablets to remind you about what you have been told. As a guide, it is usual for men to take 1-3 mg daily, and for women to take 10-20 mg daily. You can take the tablets either with or without food. Try to take your doses at the same time of day each day, as this will help you to remember to take your doses regularly. If you forget to take a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If you do not remember until the following day, leave out the forgotten dose from the previous day and take the dose that is due as normal. Do not take two doses at the same time to make up for a missed dose. Try to keep your regular appointments with your doctor. This is so your doctor can check on your progress. If you are having an operation or any dental treatment, tell the person carrying out the treatment that you are taking diethylstilbestrol. Along with their useful effects, most medicines can cause unwanted side-effects although not everyone experiences them. The table below contains some of the most common ones associated with diethylstilbestrol. You will find a full list in the manufacturer's information leaflet supplied with your medicine. The unwanted effects often improve as your body adjusts to the new medicine, but speak with your doctor or pharmacist if any of the following continue or become troublesome. If you experience any other symptoms which you think may be due to the tablets, speak with your doctor or pharmacist for further advice. Keep all medicines out of the reach and sight of children. Store in a cool, dry place, away from direct heat and light. Never take more than the prescribed dose. If you suspect that you or someone else might have taken an overdose of this medicine, go to the accident and emergency department of your local hospital at once. Take the container with you, even if it is empty. If you buy any medicines, check with a pharmacist that they are suitable to take with your other medicines. This medicine is for you. Never give it to other people even if their condition appears to be the same as yours. Do not keep out-of-date or unwanted medicines. Take them to your local pharmacy which will dispose of them for you. If you have any questions about this medicine ask your pharmacist. Are you protected against flu? See if you are eligible for a free NHS flu jab today. from the best health experts in the business Manufacturer's PIL, Diethylstilbestrol 1 mg tablets ; Brown and Burke Ltd, The electronic Medicines Compendium. Dated August 2021. Medicines Complete BNF 86th Edition ; British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London. Manufacturer's PIL, Diethylstilbestrol 1 mg tablets ; Brown and Burke Ltd, The electronic Medicines Compendium. Dated August 2021. Medicines Complete BNF 86th Edition ; British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain, London. Breast Screening with Mammography Breast Lumps and Breast Examination Breast Cancer Prostate Specific Antigen (PSA) Tumour Markers (Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment) Had private HOLEP in Jan of last year and apart from a troublesome stricture that was corrected in April of last year, everything much improved with flow rate and reduction in frequency.However the... Assess your symptoms online with our free symptom checker. Last updated by Michael Stewart, MRPharmS Peer reviewed by Sid Dajani, BPharm Document ID 3743 (v26) Last updated on 21 March 2022 Next review date 20 March 2025 The information on this page is written and peer reviewed by qualified clinicians. Disclaimer: This article is for information only and should not be used for the diagnosis or treatment of medical conditions. Egton Medical Information Systems Limited has used all reasonable care in compiling the information but make no warranty as to its accuracy. Consult a doctor or other health care professional for diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. For details see our conditions . Facebook Twitter LinkedIn WhatsApp Email